The first two sentences of Paul Harding’s Tinkers

Harding, Paul. Tinkers. 
	New York: Bellevue Literary Press, 2009.







	I chose the first two sentences of Tinkers to investigate my assumptions that a passage’s, story’s, or novel’s opening must work hard to draw the reader in and to prepare him for the rest of the text. I chose two because that is the minima for testing another assumption: in good prose, the sentences must communicate with each other.  For example, one sentence must make way for the next, and that next one must register the                   one it came from. They cohere and then set up for another sentence, and so on. 

		“George Washington Crosby began to hallucinate eight days before he 	died (Harding 1.)


	Tinkers opens with a loose sentence that in its main clause gives to the reader the who (George Washington Crosby) and the what (hallucination) the passage is about, and, in the verb complement, tells the reader when (before Crosby died.) The “what” of the sentence already begins to answer the manner and process of Crosby’s death. Here, though, his death is ancillary to him hallucinating; It’s function is to locate the disease in time. Important, too, is the amount of time--eight days before he died, because it frames the  occurrence, and provides a clock that ends when Crosby’s life does. For example, the sentence could have been periodic: Eight days before he died, George Washington Crosby began to hallucinate. In this version, however, George Washington Crosby’s full name loses its position as the head of the sentence and thus the sentence loses the full man and history that the name implies, which is to say that the sentence no longer begins as though it were an eulogy or obituary, both of which are about the dead one’s life. In my version, the word “died,” too, loses its place of greatest prominence of the end, and is buried instead near the middle of the sentence.  Crosby’s death here is in the wrong order, coming before hallucination; the sentence loses its containment and finality. In the original version, syntax matches sense:  the reader encounters the subject as a full name, starting the sentence with the slow-starting, sluggish in the mouth name George Washington Crosby and accelerates through eight days toward death, produces pressure. Hallucination, which is a confinement from the world, adds to that pressure and at the same time feels as if it were the product of the sentence’s pressure. From its position in the sentence, hallucination acts as a conveyance to death, or as death’s messenger. However, there is nothing concrete here; the sentence is an abstract pattern of what it is to come. It’s as small and compact as an explosive, and still mostly potential. It needs another sentence. 

	From the rented hospital bed, placed in the middle of his own living room, he saw 	insects running in and out of imaginary cracks in the ceiling plaster.


	The second sentence begins to divide what belongs to George Washington Crosby from what is oblivion’s.   Unlike the first sentence, this one delays the main clause, and divides the sentence into three parts in order: prepositional phrase, participial phrase, and the main clause with its own, long participial phrase.  To the reader, these three angles of vision requiring separation by commas, requiring distinction, so that each vision can contain a different ownership. 
	The prepositional phrase brings to the reader the hospital bed, an ambivalent object to get better in or to die in, though if its rented it’s probably to die in.  The bed fills the readers screen, so to speak, and perhaps there’s a hapless figure lying there too.  The bed belongs to whomever rents them out, and so is not Crosby’s, but it is not a hallucinatory bed either and so not entirely death’s. 
	Comma, a change to wide view, perhaps overhead—the bed is “placed” in the in the middle of a living room, and it is George Washington Crosby’s “own” living room. The living room belongs to him.
	Another comma, and the reader sees the subjective shot, from George Washington Crosby’s view because he sees hallucinatory insects and cracks in the ceiling--these belong to death.  They are invading what is his, his world for, as a reader may recall, in a dream a house is reputed to represent the dreamer’s psyche.  
	“Imaginary” is an interesting word in this sentence.  The insects aren’t labeled imaginary because the author can only use that word once.  If he labeled insects, then the reader would construe that the unlabeled cracks are real.  As for effect, when Crosby first sees the insects, he might not realize they were hallucinations until he notices the cracks.  If this is so, then the blatantly explanatory “imaginary” could be his, brought into the sentence when he realizes he’s hallucinating.  Or perhaps it is the narrator’s word. 
	The first sentence enacts the overarching movement of a situation, but does this from the distance of abstract exposition—a movement devoid of life. Out of its pressure, it gives birth to (embodies) an object, then the place that holds the object, and then to the false movement of hallucination (enactment) that corrupts the place, all in the second sentence.  The second sentence is both a projection and playing out of the conflict between forces introduced in the first sentence: George Washington Crosby and death.  In both sentences, syntax, punctuation, and language perform precise and multiple duties in guiding the reader. 
